Now that we are familiar with some
commonly use terms to describe data,
let's look at what data exploration is and
why it's important.
After this video,
you will be able to explain why data
exploration is necessary, articulate
the objectives of data exploration,
list the categories of techniques for
exploring data.
Data exploration means
doing some preliminary
investigation of your data set.
The goal is to gain a better understanding
of the data that you have to work with.
If you understand the characteristics of
your data, you can make optimal use of it
in whatever subsequent processing and
analysis you do with the data.
Note that data exploration is also
called exploratory data analysis, or
EDA for short.
How do you go about exploring data?
There are two main categories of
techniques to explore your data,
one based on summary statistics and
the other based on visualization methods.
Summary statistics provide important
information that summarizes a set
of data values.
There are many such statistics.
Many of them you have
probably heard of before,
such as mean, median,
and standard deviation.
These are some very commonly
used summary statistics.
A summary statistic provides a single
quantity that summarizes some aspects of
the dataset.
For example, the mean, is a single
value that describes the average value
of the dataset,
no matter how large that dataset is.
You can think of the mean as an indicator
of where your dataset is centrally located
on a number line, thus summary
statistics provide a simple and
quick way to summarize a dataset.
Data visualization techniques allow
you to look at your data, graphically.
There are several types of plots that
you can use to visualize your data.
Some examples are histogram,
line plot, and scatter plot.
Each type of plot serves a different
purpose, we will cover the use of plots to
visualize your data in
an upcoming lecture.
What should you look for
when exploring your data?
You use statistics and
visual methods to summarize and
describe your dataset, and
some of the things you'll want to look for
are correlations,
general trends and outliers.
Correlations provide information
about the relation took between
variables in your data.
By looking at correlations,
you may be able to determine that
two variables are very correlated.
This means they provide the same or
similar information about your data.
Since this contain redundant information,
this suggest that you may want to
remove one of the variables
to make the analysis simpler.
Trends in your data will reveal
characteristics in your data.
For example, you can see where
the majority of the data values lie,
whether your data is skilled or
not, what the most frequent value or
values are in a date set, etc.
Looking at trends in your data can also
reveal that a variable is moving in
a certain direction, such as sales revenue
increasing or decreasing over the years.
Calculating the minimum, the maximum and
range of the data values are basic
steps in exploring your data.
Determining outliers is
a also very important.
Outliers indicate potential
problems with the data and
may need to be eliminated
in some applications.
In other applications,
outliers represent interesting data points
that should be looked at more closely.
In either case, outliers usually
require further examination.
In summary, what you get by exploring
your data is a better understanding of
the complexity of the data so
you can work with it more effectively.
Better understanding in turn will
guide the rest of the process and
lead to more informed analysis.
Summary statistics and
visualization techniques
are essential in exploring your data.
This should be used together
to examined a dataset.
In the next two lectures,
we will look at a specific methods that
you can apply to explore your data.